FINIS. THE TEMPEST.

 Spirits.
 Reapers
 Nymphes
 Iuno
Ceres
Iris
Ariell, an ayrie spirit.
Miranda, daughter to Prospero.
Marriners.
Boate-Swaine.
Master of a Ship.
Stephano, a drunken Butler.
Trinculo, a Iester.
Caliban, a saluage and deformed slaue.
Adrian, & Francisco, Lords.
Gonzalo, an honest old Councellor.
Ferdinand, Son to the King of Naples.
Anthonio his brother, the vsurping Duke of Millaine.
Prospero, the right Duke of Millaine.
Sebastian his Brother.
Alonso, K[ing]. of Naples:

Names of the Actors.

The-, an vn-inhabited Island


Enter.

Let your Indulgence set me free.
As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
Mercy it selfe, and frees all faults.
Which pierces so, that it assaults
Vnlesse I be relieu'd by praier
And my ending is despaire,
Spirits to enforce: Art to inchant,
Which was to please: Now I want
Must fill, or else my proiect failes,
Gentle breath of yours, my Sailes
With the helpe of your good hands:
But release me from my bands
In this bare Island, by your Spell,
And pardon'd the deceiuer, dwell
Since I haue my Dukedome got,
Or sent to Naples, Let me not
I must be heere confinde by you,
Which is most faint: now 'tis true
And what strength I haue's mine owne.
Now my Charmes are all ore-throwne,

EPILOGVE, spoken by Prospero.


Exeunt. omnes.

Be free, and fare thou well: please you draw neere.
That is thy charge: Then to the Elements
Your Royall fleete farre off: My Ariel; chicke
And saile, so expeditious, that shall catch
And promise you calme Seas, auspicious gales,
   Pro. I'le deliuer all,

Take the eare strangely
To heare the story of your life; which must
   Alo. I long

Euery third thought shall be my graue
And thence retire me to my Millaine, where
Of these our deere-belou'd, solemnized,
Where I haue hope to see the nuptiall
I'le bring you to your ship, and so to Naples,
Since I came to this Isle: And in the morne
And the particular accidents, gon by
Goe quicke away: The story of my life,
With such discourse, as I not doubt, shall make it
For this one night, which part of it, Ile waste
To my poore Cell: where you shall take your rest
   Pro. Sir, I inuite your Highnesse, and your traine

   Seb. Or stole it rather

   Alo. Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it

  Pro. Goe to, away

And worship this dull foole?
Was I to take this drunkard for a god?
And seeke for grace: what a thrice double Asse
   Cal. I that I will: and Ile be wise hereafter,

To haue my pardon, trim it handsomely
Take with you your Companions: as you looke
As in his shape: Goe Sirha, to my Cell,
   Pro. He is as disproportion'd in his Manners

   Alo. This is a strange thing as ere I look'd on

  Ste. I should haue bin a sore one then

   Pro. You'ld be King o'the Isle, Sirha?

  Ste. O touch me not, I am not Stephano, but a Cramp

   Seb. Why how now Stephano?

I shall not feare fly-blowing
That I feare me will neuer out of my bones:
  Tri. I haue bin in such a pickle since I saw you last,

How cam'st thou in this pickle?
Finde this grand Liquor that hath gilded 'em?
  Alo. And Trinculo is reeling ripe: where should they

Where had he wine?
  Seb. He is drunke now;

   Alo. Is not this Stephano, my drunken Butler?

   Cal. I shall be pincht to death

Acknowledge mine
Must know, and owne, this Thing of darkenesse, I
To take my life: two of these Fellowes, you
(For he's a bastard one) had plotted with them
These three haue robd me, and this demy-diuell;
And deale in her command, without her power:
That could controle the Moone; make flowes, and ebs,
His Mother was a Witch, and one so strong
Then say if they be true: This mishapen knaue;
   Pro. Marke but the badges of these men, my Lords,

Is a plaine Fish, and no doubt marketable
  Ant. Very like: one of them

Will money buy em?
What things are these, my Lord Anthonio?
   Seb. Ha, ha:

He will chastise me
How fine my Master is? I am afraid
   Cal. O Setebos, these be braue Spirits indeede:

here's a goodly sight
   Tri. If these be true spies which I weare in my head,

But fortune: Coragio Bully-Monster Coragio
No man take care for himselfe; for all is
  Ste. Euery man shift for all the rest, and let

Apparell.
stolne
Enter Ariell, driuing in Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo in their

Some few odde Lads, that you remember not.
There are yet missing of your Companie
Vntye the Spell: How fares my gracious Sir?
Set Caliban, and his companions free:
And thinke of each thing well: Come hither Spirit,
These happend accidents: till when, be cheerefull
(Which to you shall seeme probable) of euery
(Which shall be shortly single) I'le resolue you,
The strangenesse of this businesse, at pickt leisure
Doe not infest your minde, with beating on
   Pro. Sir, my Leige,

Must rectifie our knowledge
Was euer conduct of: some Oracle
And there is in this businesse, more then nature
   Alo. This is as strange a Maze, as ere men trod,

   Pro. Brauely (my diligence) thou shalt be free

   Ar. Was't well done?

And were brought moaping hither
Euen in a dreame, were we diuided from them,
Capring to eye her: on a trice, so please you,
Our royall, good, and gallant Ship: our Master
Where we, in all our trim, freshly beheld
We were awak'd: straight way, at liberty;
And mo diuersitie of sounds, all horrible.
Of roring, shreeking, howling, gingling chaines,
Where, but euen now, with strange, and seuerall noyses
And (how we know not) all clapt vnder hatches,
I'ld striue to tell you: we were dead of sleepe,
  Bot. If I did thinke, Sir, I were well awake,

From strange, to stranger: say, how came you hither?
   Alo. These are not naturall euents, they strengthen

   Pro. My tricksey Spirit

Haue I done since I went
   Ar. Sir, all this seruice

We first put out to Sea
Is tyte, and yare, and brauely rig'd, as when
Which but three glasses since, we gaue out split,
Our King, and company: The next: our Ship,
  Bot. The best newes is, that we haue safely found

What is the newes?
Hast thou no mouth by land?
That swear'st Grace ore-boord, not an oath on shore,
This fellow could not drowne: Now blasphemy,
I prophesi'd, if a Gallowes were on Land
O looke Sir, looke Sir, here is more of vs:

Enter Ariell, with the Master and Boatswaine amazedly following.

   Gon. Be it so, Amen.

That doth not wish you ioy
Let griefe and sorrow still embrace his heart,
   Alo. Giue me your hands:

When no man was his owne
In a poore Isle: and all of vs, our selues,
Where he himselfe was lost: Prospero, his Dukedome
And Ferdinand her brother, found a wife,
Did Claribell her husband finde at Tunis,
With gold on lasting Pillers: In one voyage
Beyond a common ioy, and set it downe
Should become Kings of Naples? O reioyce
   Gon. Was Millaine thrust from Millaine, that his Issue

   Alo. I say Amen, Gonzallo

Which brought vs hither
For it is you, that haue chalk'd forth the way
And on this couple drop a blessed crowne;
Or should haue spoke ere this: looke downe you gods
   Gon. I haue inly wept,

A heauinesse that's gon
Let vs not burthen our remembrances, with
  Pro. There Sir stop,

Must aske my childe forgiuenesse?
But O, how odly will it sound, that I
   Alo. I am hers.

This Lady makes him to me
Receiu'd a second life; and second Father
But neuer saw before: of whom I haue
Of whom, so often I haue heard renowne,
Is daughter to this famous Duke of Millaine,
For his aduise: nor thought I had one: She
I chose her when I could not aske my Father
But by immortall prouidence, she's mine;
  Fer. Sir, she is mortall;

And brought vs thus together?
Is she the goddesse that hath seuer'd vs,
Your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three houres:
   Alo. What is this Maid, with whom thou was't at play?

   Pro. 'Tis new to thee

That has such people in't
How beauteous mankinde is? O braue new world
How many goodly creatures are there heere?
   Mir. O wonder!

Arise, and say how thou cam'st heere
Of a glad father, compasse thee about:
   Alo. Now all the blessings

I haue curs'd them without cause
   Fer. Though the Seas threaten they are mercifull,

   Seb. A most high miracle

Shall I twice loose
A vision of the Island, one deere Sonne
   Alo. If this proue

And I would call it faire play
   Mir. Yes, for a score of Kingdomes, you should wrangle,

I would not for the world
   Fer. No my dearest loue,

  Mir. Sweet Lord, you play me false

Chesse.
Here Prospero discouers Ferdinand and Miranda, playing at

As much, as me my Dukedome.
At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye
I will requite you with as good a thing,
My Dukedome since you haue giuen me againe,
And Subiects none abroad: pray you looke in:
This Cell's my Court: heere haue I few attendants,
Befitting this first meeting: Welcome, Sir;
Not a relation for a break-fast, nor
For 'tis a Chronicle of day by day,
To be the Lord on't: No more yet of this,
Vpon this shore (where you were wrackt) was landed
Which was thrust forth of Millaine, who most strangely
That I am Prospero, and that very Duke
Beene iustled from your sences, know for certain
Are naturall breath: but howsoeu'r you haue
Their eies doe offices of Truth: Their words
That they deuoure their reason, and scarce thinke
At this encounter doe so much admire,
  Pro. In this last Tempest. I perceiue these Lords

Where my sonne lies: when did you lose your daughter?
My selfe were mudded in that oozie bed
The King and Queene there, that they were, I wish
Oh heauens, that they were liuing both in Naples
   Alo. A daughter?

Haue lost my daughter
Then you may call to comfort you; for I
To make the deere losse, haue I meanes much weaker
  Pro. As great to me, as late, and supportable

   Alo. You the like losse?

And rest my selfe content
For the like losse, I haue her soueraigne aid,
You haue not sought her helpe, of whose soft grace
   Pro. I rather thinke


Saies, it is past her cure
   Alo. Irreparable is the losse, and patience

   Pro. I am woe for't, Sir

My deere sonne Ferdinand
(How sharp the point of this remembrance is)
Were wrackt vpon this shore? where I haue lost
How thou hast met vs heere, whom three howres since
Giue vs particulars of thy preseruation,
   Alo. If thou beest Prospero

Thou must restore
My Dukedome of thee, which, perforce I know
Thy rankest fault; all of them: and require
Would euen infect my mouth, I do forgiue
For you (most wicked Sir) whom to call brother
  Pro. No:

   Seb. The Diuell speakes in him:

I will tell no tales
And iustifie you Traitors: at this time
I heere could plucke his Highnesse frowne vpon you
But you, my brace of Lords, were I so minded
Beleeue things certaine: Wellcome, my friends all,
Some subtleties o'th' Isle, that will nor let you
   Pro. You doe yet taste

Or be not, I'le not sweare
   Gonz. Whether this be,

Be measur'd, or confin'd
Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot
  Pro. First, noble Frend,

Be liuing, and be heere?
Thou pardon me my wrongs: But how shold Prospero
Thy Dukedome I resigne, and doe entreat
(And if this be at all) a most strange story.
I feare a madnesse held me: this must craue
Th' affliction of my minde amends, with which
Beats as of flesh, and blood: and since I saw thee,
(As late I haue beene) I not know: thy Pulse
Or some inchanted triflle to abuse me,
   Alo. Where thou bee'st he or no,

A hearty welcome
And to thee, and thy Company, I bid
Do's now speake to thee, I embrace thy body,
For more assurance that a liuing Prince
The wronged Duke of Millaine, Prospero:
   Pro. Behold Sir King

Out of this fearefull Country
Inhabits heere: some heauenly power guide vs
  Gon. All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement

Enter.

Or ere your pulse twice beate.
   Ar. I drinke the aire before me, and returne

And presently, I pre'thee
Being awake, enforce them to this place;
Vnder the Hatches: the Master and the Boat-swaine
There shalt thou finde the Marriners asleepe
To the Kings ship, inuisible as thou art,
Thee, but yet thou shalt haue freedome: so, so, so,
   Pro. Why that's my dainty Ariell: I shall misse

Vnder the blossom that hangs on the Bow
Merrily, merrily, shall I liue now,
after Sommer merrily.
On the Batts backe I doe flie
There I cowch when Owles doe crie,
In a Cowslips bell, I lie,
Where the Bee sucks, there suck I,

Ariell sings, and helps to attire him.

Thou shalt ere long be free.
As I was sometime Millaine: quickly Spirit,
I will discase me, and my selfe present
Fetch me the Hat, and Rapier in my Cell,
That yet lookes on me, or would know me: Ariell,
That now ly foule, and muddy: not one of them
Will shortly fill the reasonable shore
Begins to swell, and the approching tide
Vnnaturall though thou art: Their vnderstanding
Would heere haue kill'd your King: I do forgiue thee,
(Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong)
Expelld remorse, and nature, whom, with Sebastian
You, brother mine, that entertaine ambition,
Thou art pinch'd for't now Sebastian. Flesh, and bloud,
Thy brother was a furtherer in the Act,
Did thou Alonso, vse me, and my daughter:
Home both in word, and deede: Most cruelly
To him thou follow'st; I will pay thy graces
My true preseruer, and a loyall Sir,
Their cleerer reason. O good Gonzallo
Begin to chace the ignorant fumes that mantle
(Melting the darkenesse) so their rising sences
And as the morning steales vpon the night
Fall fellowly drops: The charme dissolues apace,
Mine eyes ev'n sociable to the shew of thine
Holy Gonzallo, Honourable man,
For you are Spell-stopt.
(Now vselesse) boile within thy skull: there stand
To an vnsetled fancie, Cure thy braines
A solemne Ayre, and the best comforter,

stand charm'd: which Prospero obseruing, speakes.
there
Francisco: They all enter the circle which Prospero had made, and
Adrian and
by Gonzalo. Sebastian and Anthonio in like manner attended by
attended
Heere enters Ariel before: Then Alonso with a franticke gesture,

Solemne musicke.

Ile drowne my booke.
And deeper then did euer Plummet sound
Bury it certaine fadomes in the earth,
This Ayrie-charme is for, I'le breake my staffe,
To worke mine end vpon their Sences, that
Some heauenly Musicke (which euen now I do)
I heere abiure: and when I haue requir'd
By my so potent Art. But this rough Magicke
Haue wak'd their sleepers, op'd, and let 'em forth
The Pyne, and Cedar. Graues at my command
Haue I made shake, and by the spurs pluckt vp
With his owne Bolt: The strong bass'd promontorie
Haue I giuen fire, and rifted Ioues stowt Oke
Set roaring warre: To the dread ratling Thunder
And twixt the greene Sea, and the azur'd vault
The Noone-tide Sun, call'd forth the mutenous windes,
(Weake Masters though ye be) I haue bedymn'd
To heare the solemne Curfewe, by whose ayde
Is to make midnight-Mushrumps, that reioyce
Whereof the Ewe not bites: and you, whose pastime
By Moone-shine doe the greene sowre Ringlets make,
When he comes backe: you demy-Puppets, that
Doe chase the ebbingNeptune, and doe flie him
And ye, that on the sands with printlesse foote
  Pro. Ye Elues of hils, brooks, sta[n]ding lakes & groues,

Enter.

   Ar. Ile fetch them, Sir.

And they shall be themselues
My Charmes Ile breake, their sences Ile restore,
Not a frowne further: Goe, release them Ariell,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
In vertue, then in vengeance: they, being penitent,
Doe I take part: the rarer Action is
Yet, with my nobler reason, gainst my furie
Thogh with their high wrongs I am strook to th' quick,
Passion as they, be kindlier mou'd then thou art?
One of their kinde, that rellish all as sharpely,
Of their afflictions, and shall not my selfe,
Hast thou (which art but aire) a touch, a feeling
   Pro. And mine shall.

  Ar. Mine would, Sir, were I humane

   Pro. Dost thou thinke so, Spirit?

Would become tender
That if you now beheld them, your affections
From eaues of reeds: your charm so strongly works 'em
His teares runs downe his beard like winters drops
Him that you term'd Sir, the good old Lord Gonzallo,
Brim full of sorrow, and dismay: but chiefly
And the remainder mourning ouer them,
His Brother, and yours, abide all three distracted,
They cannot boudge till your release: The King,
In the Line-groue which weather-fends your Cell,
Iust as you left them; all prisoners Sir
In the same fashion, as you gaue in charge,
  Ar. Confin'd together

How fares the King, and's followers?
When first I rais'd the Tempest: say my Spirit,
   Pro. I did say so,

You said our worke should cease
  Ar. On the sixt hower, at which time, my Lord

Goes vpright with his carriage: how's the day?
My charmes cracke not: my Spirits obey, and Time
  Pro. Now do's my Proiect gather to a head:

Enter Prospero (in his Magicke robes) and Ariel.

Actus quintus: Scoena Prima.


Exeunt.

Follow, and doe me seruice.
Shalt haue the ayre at freedome: for a little
Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou
Lies at my mercy all mine enemies:
   Pro. Let them be hunted soundly: At this houre

   Ari. Harke, they rore

Then Pard, or Cat o' Mountaine
With aged Cramps, & more pinch-spotted make them,
With dry Convultions, shorten vp their sinewes
Goe, charge my Goblins that they grinde their ioynts
   Pro. Fury, Fury: there Tyrant, there: harke, harke.

   Ari. Siluer: there it goes, Siluer

  Pro. Hey Mountaine, hey

Hounds, hunting them about: Prospero and Ariel setting them on.
and
A noyse of Hunters heard. Enter diuers Spirits in shape of Dogs

   Ste. I, and this.

   Tri. And this

out of my kingdome: goe to, carry this
away, where my hogshead of wine is, or Ile turne you
   Ste. Monster, lay to your fingers: helpe to beare this

With foreheads villanous low
And all be turn'd to Barnacles, or to Apes
   Cal. I will haue none on't: we shall loose our time,

and away with the rest
   Tri. Monster, come put some Lime vpon your fingers,

of pate: there's another garment for't
Country: Steale by line and leuell, is an excellent passe
Wit shall not goe vn-rewarded while I am King of this
   Ste. I thank thee for that iest; heer's a garment for't:

like your grace
   Trin. Doe, doe; we steale by lyne and leuell, and't

you are like to lose your haire, & proue a bald Ierkin
my Ierkin? how is the Ierkin vnder the line: now Ierkin
   Ste. Be you quiet (Monster) Mistris line, is not this

Make vs strange stuffe
From toe to crowne hee'l fill our skins with pinches,
And doe the murther first: if he awake,
To doate thus on such luggage? let's alone
   Cal. The dropsie drowne this foole, what doe you meane

   Tri. Thy grace shall haue it

haue that gowne
   Ste. Put off that gowne (Trinculo) by this hand Ile

frippery, O King Stephano
   Tri. Oh, ho, Monster: wee know what belongs to a

   Cal. Let it alone thou foole, it is but trash

Looke what a wardrobe heere is for thee
   Trin. O King Stephano, O Peere: O worthy Stephano,

I do begin to haue bloody thoughts
   Ste. Giue me thy hand,

For aye thy foot-licker
Thine owne for euer, and I thy Caliban
Do that good mischeefe, which may make this Island
This is the mouth o'th Cell: no noise, and enter:
   Cal. Pre-thee (my King) be quiet. Seest thou heere

Though I be o're eares for my labour
   Ste. I will fetch off my bottle,

Yet this is your harmlesse Fairy, Monster
   Tr. That's more to me then my wetting:

Monster, but an infinite losse
   Ste. There is not onely disgrace and dishonor in that

   Trin. I, but to loose our bottles in the Poole

All's husht as midnight yet
Shall hudwinke this mischance: therefore speake softly,
Be patient, for the prize Ile bring thee too
   Cal. Good my Lord, giue me thy fauour stil,

   Trin. Thou wert but a lost Monster

Take a displeasure against you: Looke you
   Ste. So is mine. Do you heare Monster: If I should

My nose is in great indignation
   Trin. Monster, I do smell all horse-pisse, at which

Has done little better then plaid the Iacke with vs
   St. Monster, your Fairy, w you say is a harmles Fairy,

not heare a foot fall: we now are neere his Cell
  Cal. Pray you tread softly, that the blinde Mole may

Stephano, and Trinculo, all wet.
Enter Ariell, loaden with glistering apparell, &c. Enter Caliban,

Euen to roaring: Come, hang on them this line.
So his minde cankers: I will plague them all,
And, as with age, his body ouglier growes,
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost,
Nurture can neuer sticke: on whom my paines
  Pro. A Deuill, a borne-Deuill, on whose nature

Enter.

   Ar. I go, I goe.

For stale to catch these theeues
The trumpery in my house, goe bring it hither
Thy shape inuisible retaine thou still:
   Pro. This was well done (my bird)

Ore-stunck their feet
There dancing vp to th' chins, that the fowle Lake
I'th' filthy mantled poole beyond your Cell,
Which entred their fraile shins: at last I left them
Tooth'd briars, sharpe firzes, pricking gosse, & thorns,
That Calfe-like, they my lowing follow'd, through
As they smelt musicke, so I charm'd their eares
Aduanc'd their eye-lids, lifted vp their noses
At which like vnback't colts they prickt their eares,
Towards their proiect: then I beate my Tabor,
For kissing of their feete; yet alwaies bending
For breathing in their faces: beate the ground
So full of valour, that they smote the ayre
  Ar. I told you Sir, they were red-hot with drinking,

   Pro. Say again, where didst thou leaue these varlots?

Least I might anger thee
I thought to haue told thee of it, but I fear'd
   Ar. I my Commander, when I presented Ceres

  Pro. Spirit: We must prepare to meet with Caliban

  Ar. Thy thoughts I cleaue to, what's thy pleasure?

Enter Ariell.

  Pro. Come with a thought; I thank thee Ariell: come.

Enter.

   Fer. Mir. We wish your peace.

To still my beating minde
And there repose, a turne or two, Ile walke
If you be pleas'd, retire into my Cell,
Be not disturb'd with my infirmitie,
Beare with my weakenesse, my old braine is troubled:
Is rounded with a sleepe: Sir, I am vext,
As dreames are made on; and our little life
Leaue not a racke behinde: we are such stuffe
And like this insubstantiall Pageant faded
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolue,
The solemne Temples, the great Globe it selfe,
The Clowd-capt Towres, the gorgeous Pallaces,
And like the baselesse fabricke of this vision
Are melted into Ayre, into thin Ayre,
(As I foretold you) were all Spirits, and
Our Reuels now are ended: These our actors,
As if you were dismaid: be cheerefull Sir,
   Pro. You doe looke (my son) in a mou'd sort,

Saw I him touch'd with anger, so distemper'd
   Mir. Neuer till this day

That workes him strongly
   Fer. This is strange: your fathers in some passion

Is almost come: Well done, auoid: no more
Against my life: the minute of their plot
Of the beast Calliban, and his confederates
  Pro. I had forgot that foule conspiracy

heauily vanish.
they
and speakes, after which to a strange hollow and confused noyse,
sodainly
in a gracefull dance, towards the end whereof, Prospero starts
Nimphes,
Enter certaine Reapers (properly habited:) they ioyne with the

In Country footing.
And these fresh Nimphes encounter euery one
Make holly day: your Rye-straw hats put on,
Come hether from the furrow, and be merry,
You Sun-burn'd Sicklemen of August weary,

Enter Certaine Nimphes.

A Contract of true Loue: be not too late.
Come temperate Nimphes, and helpe to celebrate
Answere your summons, Iuno do's command.
Leaue your crispe channels, and on this green-Land
With your sedg'd crownes, and euer-harmelesse lookes,
  Iris. You Nimphs cald Nayades of y windring brooks,

Iuno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on employment.

Or else our spell is mar'd.
There's something else to doe: hush, and be mute
Iuno and Ceres whisper seriously,
   Pro. Sweet now, silence:

Makes this place Paradise
So rare a wondred Father, and a wise
   Fer. Let me liue here euer,

My present fancies
I haue from their confines call'd to enact
  Pro. Spirits, which by mine Art

To thinke these spirits?
Harmonious charmingly: may I be bold
   Fer. This is a most maiesticke vision, and

Ceres blessing so is on you
Scarcity and want shall shun you,
In the very end of Haruest.
Spring come to you at the farthest,
Plants, with goodly burthen bowing:
Vines, with clustring bunches growing,
Barnes, and Garners, neuer empty.
Earths increase, foyzon plentie,
Iuno sings her blessings on you.
Hourely ioyes, be still vpon you,
Long continuance, and encreasing,
  Iu. Honor, riches, marriage, blessing,

They sing.

And honourd in their Issue.
To blesse this twaine, that they may prosperous be,
  Iu. How do's my bounteous sister? goe with me

Great Iuno comes, I know her by her gate
   Cer. Highest Queene of State,

And be a Boy right out
Swears he will shoote no more, but play with Sparrows,
Her waspish headed sonne, has broke his arrowes,
Marses hot Minion is returnd againe,
Till Hymens Torch be lighted: but in vaine,
Whose vowes are, that no bed-right shall be paid
Some wanton charme, vpon this Man and Maide,
Doue-drawn with her: here thought they to haue done
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos: and her Son
Be not afraid: I met her deitie
   Ir. Of her societie

I haue forsworne
Her, and her blind-Boyes scandald company,
The meanes, that duskie Dis, my daughter got,
Doe now attend the Queene? since they did plot
If Venus or her Sonne, as thou do'st know,
   Cer. Tell me heauenly Bowe,

On the bles'd Louers
And some donation freely to estate
  Ir. A contract of true Loue, to celebrate,

Summond me hither, to this short gras'd Greene?
Rich scarph to my proud earth: why hath thy Queene
My boskie acres, and my vnshrubd downe,
And with each end of thy blew bowe do'st crowne
Diffusest hony drops, refreshing showres,
Who, with thy saffron wings, vpon my flowres
Do'st disobey the wife of Iupiter:
  Cer. Haile, many-coloured Messenger, that nere

Enter Ceres.

Approach, rich Ceres, her to entertaine.
To come, and sport: here Peacocks flye amaine:
Here on this grasse-plot, in this very place

Iuno  descends.

Bids thee leaue these, & with her soueraigne grace,
Whose watry Arch, and messenger, am I.
Where thou thy selfe do'st ayre, the Queene o'th Skie,
And thy Sea-marge stirrile, and rockey-hard,
Being lasse-lorne: thy pole-clipt vineyard,
Whose shadow the dismissed Batchelor loues,
To make cold Nymphes chast crownes; & thy broomegroues;
Which spungie Aprill, at thy hest betrims;
Thy bankes with pioned, and twilled brims
And flat Medes thetchd with Stouer, them to keepe:
Thy Turphie-Mountaines, where liue nibling Sheepe,
Of Wheate, Rye, Barley, Fetches, Oates and Pease;
  Ir. Ceres, most bounteous Lady, thy rich Leas

Enter Iris.

No tongue: all eyes: be silent.

Soft musick.

Rather then want a Spirit; appear, & pertly.
Now come my Ariell, bring a Corolary,
   Pro. Well.

Abates the ardour of my Liuer
The white cold virgin Snow, vpon my heart
   Fer. I warrant you, Sir,

Or else good night your vow
To th' fire ith' blood: be more abstenious,
Too much the raigne: the strongest oathes, are straw
  Pro. Looke thou be true: doe not giue dalliance

Enter.

   Ar. Well: I conceiue.

Till thou do'st heare me call
  Pro. Dearely, my delicate Ariell: doe not approach

Doe you loue me Master? no?
Will be here with mop, and mowe.
Each one tripping on his Toe,
And breathe twice; and cry, so, so:
   Ar. Before you can say come, and goe,

  Pro. I: with a twincke

   Ar. Presently?

And they expect it from me
Some vanity of mine Art: it is my promise,
Bestow vpon the eyes of this yong couple
Incite them to quicke motion, for I must
(Ore whom I giue thee powre) here, to this place:
In such another tricke: goe bring the rabble
Did worthily performe: and I must vse you
   Pro. Thou, and thy meaner fellowes, your last seruice

  Ar. What would my potent master? here I am

Enter Ariell.

What Ariell; my industrious serua[n]t Ariell.
Sit then, and talke with her, she is thine owne;
   Pro. Fairely spoke;

Or Night kept chain'd below
When I shall thinke, or Phoebus Steeds are founderd,
The edge of that dayes celebration,
Mine honor into lust, to take away
Our worser Genius can, shall neuer melt
The most opportune place, the strongst suggestion,
With such loue, as 'tis now the murkiest den,
For quiet dayes, faire Issue, and long life,
   Fer. As I hope

As Hymens Lamps shall light you
That you shall hate it both: Therefore take heede,
The vnion of your bed, with weedes so loathly
Sower-ey'd disdaine, and discord shall bestrew
To make this contract grow; but barraine hate,
No sweet aspersion shall the heauens let fall
With full and holy right, be ministred,
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
If thou do'st breake her Virgin-knot, before
Worthily purchas'd, take my daughter: But
   Pro. Then, as my guest, and thine owne acquisition

Against an Oracle
   Fer. I doe beleeue it

And make it halt, behinde her
For thou shalt finde she will out-strip all praise
Doe not smile at me, that I boast her of,
I ratifie this my rich guift: O Ferdinand,
Hast strangely stood the test: here, afore heauen
Were but my trials of thy loue, and thou
I tender to thy hand: All thy vexations
Or that for which I liue: who, once againe
Haue giuen you here, a third of mine owne life,
Your compensation makes amends, for I
  Pro. If I haue too austerely punish'd you,

Enter Prospero, Ferdinand, and Miranda.

Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.


Exeunt. omnes.

   Ad. Follow, I pray you.

May now prouoke them to
And hinder them from what this extasie
(That are of suppler ioynts) follow them swiftly,
Now gins to bite the spirits: I doe beseech you
(Like poyson giuen to worke a great time after)
  Gon. All three of them are desperate: their great guilt

Exeunt.

   Ant. Ile be thy Second.

Ile fight their Legions ore
  Seb. But one feend at a time,

Enter.

And with him there lye mudded.
I'le seeke him deeper then ere plummet sounded,
Therefore my Sonne i'th Ooze is bedded; and
The name of Prosper: it did base my Trespasse,
(That deepe and dreadfull Organ-Pipe) pronounc'd
The windes did sing it to me: and the Thunder
Me thought the billowes spoke, and told me of it,
  Al. O, it is monstrous: monstrous:

In this strange stare?
   Gon. I'th name of something holy, Sir, why stand you

And his, and mine lou'd darling
Yong Ferdinand (whom they suppose is droun'd)
And in these fits, I leaue them, while I visit
In their distractions: they now are in my powre;
And these (mine enemies) are all knit vp
Their seuerall kindes haue done: my high charmes work,
And obseruation strange, my meaner ministers
In what thou had'st to say: so with good life,
Of my Instruction, hast thou nothing bated
Perform'd (my Ariell) a grace it had deuouring:
  Pro. Brauely the figure of this Harpie, hast thou

and daunce (with mockes and mowes) and carrying out the Table.
againe,
He vanishes in Thunder: then (to soft Musicke.) Enter the shapes

And a cleere life ensuing.
Vpon your heads, is nothing but hearts-sorrow,
Which here, in this most desolate Isle, else fals
You, and your wayes, whose wraths to guard you from,
Can be at once) shall step, by step attend
Lingring perdition (worse then any death
They haue bereft; and doe pronounce by me
Against your peace: Thee of thy Sonne, Alonso
Incens'd the Seas, and Shores; yea, all the Creatures
The Powres, delaying (not forgetting) haue
Him, and his innocent childe: for which foule deed,
Expos'd vnto the Sea (which hath requit it)
From Millaine did supplant good Prospero,
(For that's my businesse to you) that you three
And will not be vplifted: But remember
Your swords are now too massie for your strengths,
Are like-invulnerable: if you could hurt,
One dowle that's in my plumbe: My fellow ministers
Kill the still closing waters, as diminish
Wound the loud windes, or with bemockt-at-Stabs
Of whom your swords are temper'd, may as well
Are ministers of Fate, the Elements
Their proper selues: you fooles, I and my fellowes
And euen with such like valour, men hang, and drowne
Being most vnfit to liue: I haue made you mad;
Where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men,
Hath caus'd to belch vp you: and on this Island,
And what is in't: the neuer surfeited Sea,
That hath to instrument this lower world,
  Ar. You are three men of sinne, whom destiny

the Table, and with a quient deuice the Banquet vanishes.
wings vpon
Thunder and Lightning. Enter Ariell (like a Harpey) claps his

Stand too, and doe as we.
The best is past: brother: my Lord, the Duke,
Although my last, no matter, since I feele
   Al. I will stand to, and feede,

Good warrant of
Each putter out of fiue for one, will bring vs
Whose heads stood in their brests? which now we finde
Wallets of flesh? or that there were such men
Dew-lapt, like Buls, whose throats had hanging at 'em
Who would beleeue that there were Mountayneeres,
   Gon. Faith Sir, you neede not feare: when wee were Boyes

  Alo. Not I

Wilt please you taste of what is here?
They haue left their Viands behinde; for wee haue stomacks.
   Seb. No matter, since

   Fr. They vanish'd strangely

   Pro. Praise in departing

Of excellent dumbe discourse
(Although they want the vse of tongue) a kinde
Such shapes, such gesture, and such sound expressing
   Al. I cannot too much muse

Are worse then diuels
Thou hast said well: for some of you there present;
   Pro. Honest Lord,

Many, nay almost any
Our humaine generation you shall finde
Their manners are more gentle, kinde, then of
Who though they are of monstrous shape, yet note
(For certes, these are people of the Island)
If I should say I saw such Islands;
I should report this now, would they beleeue me?
   Gon. If in Naples

Though fooles at home condemne 'em
And Ile besworne 'tis true: Trauellers nere did lye,
And what do's else want credit, come to me
   Ant. Ile beleeue both:

At this houre reigning there
There is one Tree, the Phoenix throne, one Phoenix
That there are Vnicornes: that in Arabia
  Seb. A liuing Drolerie: now I will beleeue

   Alo. Giue vs kind keepers, heaue[n]s: what were these?

   Gon. Maruellous sweet Musicke

   Al. What harmony is this? my good friends, harke

  Seb. I say to night: no more

depart.
they
gentle actions of salutations, and inuiting the King, &c. to eate,
about it with
Enter seuerall strange shapes, bringing in a Banket; and dance
Solemne and strange Musicke: and Prosper on the top (inuisible:)

As when they are fresh.
Will not, nor cannot vse such vigilance
For now they are oppress'd with trauaile, they
   Ant. Let it be to night,

   Seb. The next aduantage will we take throughly

That you resolu'd t' effect
Doe not for one repulse forgoe the purpose
   Ant. I am right glad, that he's so out of hope:

Our frustrate search on land: well, let him goe
Whom thus we stray to finde, and the Sea mocks
No longer for my Flatterer: he is droun'd
Euen here I will put off my hope, and keepe it
To th' dulling of my spirits: Sit downe, and rest:
Who, am my selfe attach'd with wearinesse
   Al. Old Lord, I cannot blame thee,

I needes must rest me
Through fourth-rights, & Meanders: by your patience,
My old bones akes: here's a maze trod indeede
  Gon. By'r lakin, I can goe no further, Sir,

&c.
Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Anthonio, Gonzallo, Adrian, Francisco,

Scena Tertia.


Exeunt.

Ile follow Stephano.
   Trin. Wilt come?

He layes it on
Wee'l follow: I would I could see this Taborer,
   Ste. Leade Monster,

Lets follow it, and after do our worke
   Trin. The sound is going away,

I remember the storie
   Ste. That shall be by and by:

   Cal. When Prospero is destroy'd

Where I shall haue my Musicke for nothing
   Ste. This will proue a braue kingdome to me,

I cri'de to dreame againe
Ready to drop vpon me, that when I wak'd
The clouds methought would open, and shew riches
Will make me sleepe againe, and then in dreaming,
That if I then had wak'd after long sleepe,
Will hum about mine eares; and sometime voices,
Sometimes a thousand twangling Instruments
Sounds, and sweet aires, that giue delight and hurt not:
   Cal. Be not affeard, the Isle is full of noyses,

  Ste. No Monster, not I

   Cal. Art thou affeard?

Mercy vpon vs
   Ste. He that dies payes all debts: I defie thee;

   Trin. O forgiue me my sinnes

If thou beest a diuell, take't as thou list
   Ste. If thou beest a man, shew thy selfe in thy likenes:

of No-body
  Trin. This is the tune of our Catch, plaid by the picture

  Ste. What is this same?

Ariell plaies the tune on a Tabor and Pipe.

   Cal. That's not the tune.

Thought is free
Flout 'em, and cout 'em: and skowt 'em, and flout 'em,

Sings.

Any reason: Come on Trinculo, let vs sing.
  Ste. At thy request Monster, I will do reason,

You taught me but whileare?
Let vs be iocond. Will you troule the Catch
   Cal. Thou mak'st me merry: I am full of pleasure,

   Ariell. This will I tell my Master

  Ste. I on mine honour

Wilt thou destroy him then?
   Cal. Within this halfe houre will he be asleepe,

But while thou liu'st keepe a good tongue in thy head
   Ste. Giue me thy hand, I am sorry I beate thee:

  Trin. Excellent

Dost thou like the plot Trinculo?
and thy selfe shall be Viceroyes:
I will be King and Queene, saue our Graces: and Trinculo
   Ste. Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and

And bring thee forth braue brood
  Cal. I Lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant,

   Ste. Is it so braue a Lasse?

As great'st do's least
But she as farre surpasseth Sycorax,
But onely Sycorax my Dam, and she;
Cals her a non-pareill: I neuer saw a woman
The beautie of his daughter: he himselfe
And that most deeply to consider, is
Which when he ha's a house, hee'l decke withall.
He ha's braue Vtensils (for so he calles them)
As rootedly as I. Burne but his Bookes,
One Spirit to command: they all do hate him
Hee's but a Sot, as I am; nor hath not
First to possesse his Bookes; for without them
Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Hauing first seiz'd his bookes: Or with a logge
I'th afternoone to sleepe: there thou maist braine him,
   Cal. Why, as I told thee, 'tis a custome with him

   Ste. Stand farther: Come proceede

Ile beate him too
   Cal. Beate him enough: after a little time

further off
   Ste. Now forward with your Tale: prethee stand

   Cal. Ha, ha, ha

fingers
A murren on your Monster, and the diuell take your
A pox o'your bottle, this can Sacke and drinking doo:
hearing too?
   Trin. I did not giue the lie: Out o'your wittes, and

As you like this, giue me the lye another time
   Ste. Do I so? Take thou that,

  Ariell. Thou liest
   Ste. Didst thou not say he lyed?

Ile go farther off
   Trin. Why, what did I? I did nothing:

Stockfish of thee
hand, Ile turne my mercie out o' doores, and make a
Interrupt the Monster one word further, and by this
   Ste. Trinculo, run into no further danger:

Where the quicke Freshes are
He shall drinke nought but brine, for Ile not shew him
And take his bottle from him: When that's gone,
I do beseech thy Greatnesse giue him blowes,
   Cal. What a py'de Ninnie's this? Thou scuruy patch:

   Ariell. Thou liest, thou canst not

Where thou maist knocke a naile into his head
  Cal. Yea, yea my Lord, Ile yeeld him thee asleepe,

Canst thou bring me to the party?
   Ste. How now shall this be compast?

   Cal. Thou shalt be Lord of it, and Ile serue thee

   Ste. That's most certaine

But this Thing dare not
Reuenge it on him, (for I know thou dar'st)
From me, he got it. If thy Greatnesse will
   Cal. I say by Sorcery he got this Isle

   Ste. Mum then, and no more: proceed

   Trin. Why, I said nothing

By this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth
   Ste. Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale,

I do not lye
I would my valiant Master would destroy thee.
   Cal. Thou lyest, thou iesting Monkey thou:

   Ariell. Thou lyest

Of the Island
A Sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me
  Cal. As I told thee before, I am subiect to a Tirant,

Enter Ariell inuisible.

I will stand, and so shall Trinculo.
  Ste. Marry will I: kneele, and repeate it,

to hearken once againe to the suite I made to thee?
   Cal. I thanke my noble Lord. Wilt thou be pleas'd

my subiect, and he shall not suffer indignity
you proue a mutineere, the next Tree: the poore Monster's
   Ste. Trinculo, keepe a good tongue in your head: If

  Cal. Loe, loe againe: bite him to death I prethee

a Naturall?
  Trin. Lord, quoth he? that a Monster should be such

Lord?
  Cal. Loe, how he mockes me, wilt thou let him my

but halfe a Fish, and halfe a Monster?
Sacke as I to day? wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being
was there euer man a Coward, that hath drunk so much
to iustle a Constable: why, thou debosh'd Fish thou,
   Trin. Thou liest most ignorant Monster, I am in case

Ile not serue him, he is not valiant
   Cal. How does thy honour? Let me licke thy shooe:

a good Moone-calfe
   Ste. Moone-calfe, speak once in thy life, if thou beest

say nothing neither
   Trin. Nor go neither: but you'l lie like dogs, and yet

   Ste. Weel not run Monsieur Monster

   Trin. Your Lieutenant if you list, hee's no standard

Monster, or my Standard
off and on, by this light thou shalt bee my Lieutenant
ere I could recouer the shore, fiue and thirtie Leagues
sacke: for my part the Sea cannot drowne mee, I swam
   Ste. My man-Monster hath drown'd his tongue in

braue Monster indeede if they were set in his taile
   Trin. Where should they bee set else? hee were a

eies are almost set in thy head
   Ste. Drinke seruant Monster when I bid thee, thy

if th' other two be brain'd like vs, the State totters
say there's but fiue vpon this Isle; we are three of them,
   Trin. Seruant Monster? the folly of this Iland, they

em' Seruant Monster, drinke to me
water, not a drop before; therefore beare vp, & boord
  Ste. Tell not me, when the But is out we will drinke

Enter Caliban, Stephano, and Trinculo.

Scoena Secunda.


Enter.

Much businesse appertaining.
For yet ere supper time, must I performe
At nothing can be more: Ile to my booke,
Who are surpriz'd with all; but my reioycing
  Pro. So glad of this as they I cannot be,

Exeunt.

   Fer. A thousand, thousand.

Till halfe an houre hence
   Mir. And mine, with my heart in't; and now farewel

As bondage ere of freedome: heere's my hand
  Fer. I, with a heart as willing

   Mir. My husband then?

And I thus humble euer
   Fer. My Mistris (deerest)

Whether you will or no
You may denie me, but Ile be your seruant
If not, Ile die your maid: to be your fellow
I am your wife, if you will marrie me;
And prompt me plaine and holy innocence.
The bigger bulke it shewes. Hence bashfull cunning,
And all the more it seekes to hide it selfe,
What I shall die to want: But this is trifling,
What I desire to giue; and much lesse take
  Mir. At mine vnworthinesse, that dare not offer

   Fer. Wherefore weepe you?

On that which breeds betweene 'em
Of two most rare affections: heauens raine grace
   Pro. Faire encounter

To weepe at what I am glad of
   Mir. I am a foole

Do loue, prize, honor you
Beyond all limit of what else i'th world
What best is boaded me, to mischiefe: I,
If I speake true: if hollowly, inuert
And crowne what I professe with kinde euent
  Fer. O heauen; O earth, beare witnes to this sound,

   Mir. Do you loue me?

Am I this patient Logge-man
To make me slaue to it, and for your sake
My heart flie to your seruice, there resides
The verie instant that I saw you, did
The flesh-flie blow my mouth: heare my soule speake.
This wodden slauerie, then to suffer
(I would not so) and would no more endure
A Prince (Miranda) I do thinke a King
   Fer. I am, in my condition

I therein do forget
Something too wildely, and my Fathers precepts
Besides your selfe, to like of: but I prattle
Nor can imagination forme a shape
Any Companion in the world but you:
(The iewell in my dower) I would not wish
I am skillesse of; but by my modestie
And my deere Father: how features are abroad
More that I may call men, then you good friend,
Saue from my glasse, mine owne: Nor haue I seene
One of my sexe; no womans face remember,
   Mir. I do not know

Of euerie Creatures best
So perfect, and so peerlesse, are created
And put it to the foile. But you, O you,
Did quarrell with the noblest grace she ow'd,
With so full soule, but some defect in her
Haue I lik'd seuerall women, neuer any
Brought my too diligent eare: for seuerall vertues
Th' harmony of their tongues, hath into bondage
I haue ey'd with best regard, and many a time
What's deerest to the world: full many a Lady
Indeede the top of Admiration, worth
   Fer. Admir'd Miranda,

I haue broke your hest to say so
  Mir. Miranda, O my Father,

What is your name?
Cheefely, that I might set it in my prayers,
When you are by at night: I do beseech you
   Fer. No, noble Mistris, 'tis fresh morning with me

   Mir. You looke wearily

This visitation shewes it
   Pro. Poore worme thou art infected,

And yours it is against
With much more ease: for my good will is to it,
As well as it do's you; and I should do it
   Mir. It would become me

While I sit lazy by
Then you should such dishonor vndergoe,
I had rather cracke my sinewes, breake my backe,
   Fer. No precious Creature,

Ile carry it to the pile
Ile beare your Logges the while: pray giue me that,
   Mir. If you'l sit downe

What I must striue to do
The Sun will set before I shall discharge
   Fer. O most deere Mistris

Hee's safe for these three houres
Is hard at study; pray now rest your selfe,
'Twill weepe for hauing wearied you: my Father
Pray set it downe, and rest you: when this burnes
Burnt vp those Logs that you are enioynd to pile:
Worke not so hard: I would the lightning had
  Mir. Alas, now pray you

Enter Miranda | and Prospero.

Most busie lest, when I doe it.
But these sweet thoughts, doe euen refresh my labours,
Had neuer like Executor: I forget:
Weepes when she sees me worke, & saies, such basenes
Vpon a sore iniunction; my sweet Mistris
Some thousands of these Logs, and pile them vp,
And he's compos'd of harshnesse. I must remoue
Ten times more gentle, then her Father's crabbed;
And makes my labours, pleasures: O She is
The Mistris which I serue, quickens what's dead,
Would be as heauy to me, as odious, but
Point to rich ends: this my meane Taske
Are nobly vndergon; and most poore matters
Delight in them set off: Some kindes of basenesse
  Fer. There be some Sports are painfull; & their labor

Enter Ferdinand (bearing a Log.)

Actus Tertius. Scoena Prima.


Exeunt.

   Ste. O braue Monster; lead the way.

freedome
Freedome, high-day, high-day freedome, freedome highday,
Has a new Master, get a new Man.
Ban' ban' Cacalyban
Nor scrape trenchering, nor wash dish,
Nor fetch in firing, at requiring,
   Cal. No more dams I'le make for fish,

   Tri. A howling Monster: a drunken Monster

Farewell Master; farewell, farewell

Caliban Sings drunkenly.

Bottle: Fellow Trinculo; we'll fill him by and by againe.
being dround, wee will inherit here: Here; beare my
talking. Trinculo, the King, and all our company else
  Ste. I pre'thee now lead the way without any more

from the Rocke: Wilt thou goe with me?
Philbirts, and sometimes I'le get thee young Scamels
the nimble Marmazet: I'le bring thee to clustring
show thee a Iayes nest, and instruct thee how to snare
and I with my long nayles will digge thee pig-nuts;
   Cal. I 'prethee let me bring thee where Crabs grow;

a poore drunkard
   Tri. A most rediculous Monster, to make a wonder of

wondrous man
I'le beare him no more Stickes, but follow thee, thou
A plague vpon the Tyrant that I serue;
Berries: I'le fish for thee; and get thee wood enough.
   Cal. I'le shew thee the best Springs: I'le plucke thee

An abhominable Monster
   Tri. But that the poore Monster's in drinke:

   Ste. Come, kisse

my heart to beate him
Monster: a most scuruie Monster: I could finde in
   Tri. I shall laugh my selfe to death at this puppi-headed

   Ste. Come on then: downe and sweare

   Cal. Ile kisse thy foot, Ile sweare my selfe thy Subiect

Monster, when's god's a sleepe he'll rob his Bottle
   Tri. By this light, a most perfidious, and drunken

I will kisse thy foote: I prethee be my god
   Cal. Ile shew thee euery fertill ynch o'th Island: and

Well drawne Monster, in good sooth
A most poore creadulous Monster:
The Man ith' Moone?
I afeard of him? a very weake Monster:
   Tri. By this good light, this is a very shallow Monster:

furnish it anon with new Contents: Sweare
   Ste. Come, sweare to that: kisse the Booke: I will

My Mistris shew'd me thee, and thy Dog, and thy Bush
   Cal. I haue seene thee in her: and I doe adore thee:

Man ith' Moone, when time was
  Ste. Out o'th Moone I doe assure thee. I was the

  Cal. Ha'st thou not dropt from heauen?

How now Moone-Calfe, how do's thine Ague?
by th' sea-side, where my Wine is hid:
  Ste. The whole But (man) my Cellar is in a rocke

   Tri. O Stephano, ha'st any more of this?

like a Goose
Though thou canst swim like a Ducke, thou art made
   Ste. Here, kisse the Booke.

like a Ducke i'le be sworne
   Tri. Swom ashore (man) like a Ducke: I can swim

   St. Heere: sweare then how thou escap'dst

for the liquor is not earthly
   Cal. I'le sweare vpon that Bottle, to be thy true subiect,

a Tree, with mine owne hands, since I was cast a'shore
by this Bottle which I made of the barke of
vpon a But of Sacke, which the Saylors heaued o'reboord,
Sweare by this Bottle how thou cam'st hither: I escap'd
How cam'st thou hither?
   Ste. How did'st thou scape?

kneele to him
that's a braue God, and beares Celestiall liquor: I will
   Cal. These be fine things, and if they be not sprights:

is not constant
  Ste. 'Prethee doe not turne me about, my stomacke

two Neapolitanes scap'd?
the Storme: And art thou liuing Stephano? O Stephano,
vnder the dead Moone-Calfes Gaberdine, for feare of
not dround: Is the Storme ouer-blowne? I hid mee
art thou not dround Stephano: I hope now thou art
  Tri. I tooke him to be kil'd with a thunder-strok; but

he vent Trinculo's?
cam'st thou to be the siege of this Moone-calfe? Can
these are they: Thou art very Trinculo indeede: how
thee by the lesser legges: if any be Trinculo's legges,
   Ste. If thou bee'st Trinculo: come forth: I'le pull

good friend Trinculo
speake to me: for I am Trinculo; be not afeard, thy
   Tri. Stephano: if thou beest Stephano, touch me, and

haue no long Spoone
This is a diuell, and no Monster: I will leaue him, I
   Ste. Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy:

   Tri. Stephano

poure some in thy other mouth
him, I will helpe his Ague: Come: Amen, I will
and to detract: if all the wine in my bottle will recouer
his friend; his backward voice, is to vtter foule speeches,
Monster: his forward voyce now is to speake well of
   Ste. Foure legges and two voyces; a most delicate

me
But hee is dround; and these are diuels; O defend
It should be,
   Tri. I should know that voyce:

your chaps againe
that soundly: you cannot tell who's your friend; open
mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and
is that which will giue language to you Cat; open your
   Ste. Come on your wayes: open your mouth: here

vpon thee
I know it by thy trembling: Now Prosper workes
   Cal. Thou do'st me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon,

and that soundly
too much for him; hee shall pay for him that hath him,
if I can recouer him, and keepe him tame, I will not take
drunke wine afore, it will goe neere to remoue his Fit:
wisest; hee shall taste of my Bottle: if hee haue neuer
   Ste. He's in his fit now; and doe's not talke after the

wood home faster
   Cal. Doe not torment me 'prethee: I'le bring my

for any Emperour that euer trod on Neates-leather
him tame, and get to Naples with him, he's a Present
if it be but for that: if I can recouer him, and keepe
should he learne our language? I will giue him some reliefe
who hath got (as I take it) an Ague: where the diuell
   Ste. This is some Monster of the Isle, with foure legs;

   Cal. The Spirit torments me: oh

breathes at' nostrils
giue ground: and it shall be said so againe, while Stephano
a man as euer went on foure legs, cannot make him
now of your foure legges: for it hath bin said; as proper
Inde? ha? I haue not scap'd drowning, to be afeard
Doe you put trickes vpon's with Saluages, and Men of
Haue we diuels here?
   Ste. What's the matter?

  Cal. Doe not torment me: oh

Drinks.

But here's my comfort.
This is a scuruy tune too:
Then to Sea Boyes, and let her goe hang.
Yet a Tailor might scratch her where ere she did itch.
She lou'd not the sauour of Tar nor of Pitch,
Would cry to a Sailor goe hang:
For she had a tongue with a tang,
But none of vs car'd for Kate.
Lou'd Mall, Meg, and Marrian, and Margerie,
The Gunner, and his Mate
The Master, the Swabber, the Boate-swaine & I;

Sings.

Drinkes.

Funerall: well, here's my comfort.
This is a very scuruy tune to sing at a mans
  Ste. I shall no more to sea, to sea, here shall I dye ashore.

Enter Stephano singing..

be past.
I will here shrowd till the dregges of the storme
Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellowes:
his Gaberdine: there is no other shelter hereabout:
the storme is come againe: my best way is to creepe vnder
that hath lately suffered by a Thunderbolt: Alas,
hold it no longer; this is no fish, but an Islander,
Armes: warme o'my troth: I doe now let loose my opinion;
a dead Indian: Leg'd like a man; and his Finnes like
doit to relieue a lame Begger, they will lay out ten to see
beast there, makes a man: when they will not giue a
there, would this Monster, make a man: any strange
a holiday-foole there but would giue a peece of siluer:
now (as once I was) and had but this fish painted; not
newest poore-Iohn: a strange fish: were I in England
very ancient and fish-like smell: a kinde of, not of the
or a fish? dead or aliue? a fish, hee smels like a fish: a
choose but fall by pailefuls. What haue we here, a man,
not where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot
licquor: if it should thunder, as it did before, I know
one, lookes like a foule bumbard that would shed his
sing ith' winde: yond same blacke cloud, yond huge
weather at all: and another Storme brewing, I heare it
   Tri. Here's neither bush, nor shrub to beare off any

Perchance he will not minde me
For bringing wood in slowly: I'le fall flat,
Here comes a Spirit of his, and to torment me

Enter  Trinculo.

Doe hisse me into madnesse: Lo, now Lo,
All wound with Adders, who with clouen tongues
Their pricks at my foot-fall: sometime am I
Lye tumbling in my bare-foote way, and mount
And after bite me: then like Hedg-hogs, which
Sometime like Apes, that moe and chatter at me,
For euery trifle, are they set vpon me,
Out of my way, vnlesse he bid 'em; but
Nor lead me like a fire-brand, in the darke
Fright me with Vrchyn-shewes, pitch me i'th mire,
And yet I needes must curse. But they'll nor pinch,
By ynch-meale a disease: his Spirits heare me,
From Bogs, Fens, Flats, on Prosper fall, and make him
  Cal. All the infections that the Sunne suckes vp

Enter Caliban, with a burthen of Wood (a noyse of thunder heard.)

Scoena Secunda.

Exeunt.

So (King) goe safely on to seeke thy Son.
   Ariell. Prospero my Lord, shall know what I haue done.

   Alo. Lead away

For he is sure i'th Island
   Gon. Heauens keepe him from these Beasts:

For my poore sonne
   Alo. Lead off this ground & let's make further search

Or that we quit this place: let's draw our weapons
That's verily: 'tis best we stand vpon our guard;
I saw their weapons drawne: there was a noyse,
I shak'd you Sir, and cride: as mine eyes opend,
(And that a strange one too) which did awake me:
  Gon. Vpon mine honour, Sir, I heard a humming,

   Alo. Heard you this Gonzalo?

Of a whole heard of Lyons
To make an earthquake: sure it was the roare
   Ant. O, 'twas a din to fright a Monsters eare;

   Alo. I heard nothing

It strooke mine eare most terribly
Like Buls, or rather Lyons, did't not wake you?
(Euen now) we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
  Seb. Whiles we stood here securing your repose,

  Gon. What's the matter?

Wherefore this ghastly looking?
   Alo. Why how now hoa; awake? why are you drawn?

   Gon. Now, good Angels preserue the King

   Ant. Then let vs both be sodaine

Awake, awake
Shake off slumber and beware.
If of Life you keepe a care,
His time doth take:
Open-ey'd Conspiracie
While you here do snoaring lie,

Sings in Gonzaloes eare.

(For else his proiect dies) to keepe them liuing.
That you (his friend) are in, and sends me forth
  Ariel. My Master through his Art foresees the danger

Enter Ariell with Musicke and Song.

   Seb. O, but one word.

To fall it on Gonzalo
And when I reare my hand, do you the like
   Ant. Draw together:

And I the King shall loue thee
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou paiest,
I'le come by Naples: Draw thy sword, one stroke
Shall be my president: As thou got'st Millaine,
   Seb. Thy case, deere Friend

We say befits the houre
They'l tell the clocke, to any businesse that
They'l take suggestion, as a Cat laps milke,
Should not vpbraid our course: for all the rest
This ancient morsell: this Sir Prudence, who
To the perpetuall winke for aye might put
Can lay to bed for euer: whiles you doing thus,
Whom I with this obedient steele (three inches of it)
If he were that which now hee's like (that's dead)
No better then the earth he lies vpon,
And melt ere they mollest: Heere lies your Brother,
That stand 'twixt me, and Millaine, candied be they,
This Deity in my bosome: 'Twentie consciences
'Twould put me to my slipper: But I feele not
   Ant. I Sir: where lies that? If 'twere a kybe

   Seb. But for your conscience

Were then my fellowes, now they are my men
Much feater then before: My Brothers seruants
And looke how well my Garments sit vpon me,
   Ant. True:

You did supplant your Brother Prospero
  Seb. I remember

Tender your owne good fortune?
   Ant. And how do's your content

   Seb. Me thinkes I do

For your aduancement? Do you vnderstand me?
The minde that I do; what a sleepe were this
A Chough of as deepe chat: O, that you bore
As this Gonzallo: I my selfe could make
As amply, and vnnecessarily
As well as he that sleepes: Lords, that can prate
Then now they are: There be that can rule Naples
That now hath seiz'd them, why they were no worse
And let Sebastian wake. Say, this were death
Measure vs backe to Naples? keepe in Tunis,
Seemes to cry out, how shall that Claribell
   Ant. A space, whose eu'ry cubit

There is some space
So is she heyre of Naples, 'twixt which Regions
'Tis true my brothers daughter's Queene of Tunis,
   Seb. What stuffe is this? How say you?

In yours, and my discharge
Whereof, what's past is Prologue; what to come
(And by that destiny) to performe an act
We all were sea-swallow'd, though some cast againe,
Be rough, and Razor-able: She that from whom
The Man i'th Moone's too slow, till new-borne chinnes
Can haue no note, vnlesse the Sun were post:
Ten leagues beyond mans life: she that from Naples
   Ant. She that is Queene of Tunis: she that dwels

   Seb. Claribell

   Ant. Then tell me, who's the next heire of Naples?

   Seb. He's gone

That Ferdinand is drown'd
But doubt discouery there. Will you grant with me
Ambition cannot pierce a winke beyond
Another way so high a hope, that euen
What great hope haue you? No hope that way, Is
   Ant. O, out of that no hope,

That hee's vndrown'd
   Seb. I haue no hope

As he that sleepes heere, swims
'Tis as impossible that hee's vndrown'd,
Professes to perswade) the King his sonne's aliue,
(For hee's a Spirit of perswasion, onely
When he is earth'd, hath here almost perswaded
Who shall be of as little memory
Although this Lord of weake remembrance; this
   Ant. Thus Sir:

Which throwes thee much to yeeld
A matter from thee; and a birth, indeed,
The setting of thine eye, and cheeke proclaime
   Seb. 'Pre-thee say on,

By their owne feare, or sloth
(Most often) do so neere the bottome run
You more inuest it: ebbing men, indeed
Whiles thus you mocke it: how in stripping it
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
   Ant. O!

Hereditary Sloth instructs me
   Seb. Do so: to ebbe

   Ant. Ile teach you how to flow

   Seb. Well: I am standing water

Trebbles thee o're
Must be so too, if heed me: which to do,
   Ant. I am more serious then my custome: you

There's meaning in thy snores
   Seb. Thou do'st snore distinctly,

Whiles thou art waking
Thou let'st thy fortune sleepe: die rather: wink'st
   Ant. Noble Sebastian,

And yet so fast asleepe
With eyes wide open: standing, speaking, mouing:
This is a strange repose, to be asleepe
Out of thy sleepe: What is it thou didst say?
It is a sleepy Language; and thou speak'st
  Seb. I do, and surely

  Ant. Do you not heare me speake?

   Seb. What? art thou waking?

Dropping vpon thy head
My strong imagination see's a Crowne
What thou should'st be: th' occasion speaks thee, and
And yet, me thinkes I see it in thy face,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might? no more:
They dropt, as by a Thunder-stroke: what might
They fell together all, as by consent
   Ant. Nor I, my spirits are nimble:

Not my selfe dispos'd to sleep
Doth it not then our eye-lids sinke? I finde
   Seb. Why

  Ant. It is the quality o'th' Clymate

   Seb. What a strange drowsines possesses them?

   Alon. Thanke you: Wondrous heauy

While you take your rest, and watch your safety
   Ant. We two my Lord, will guard your person,

It sildome visits sorrow, when it doth, it is a Comforter
Do not omit the heauy offer of it:
   Seb. Please you Sir,

I finde they are inclin'd to do so
Would (with themselues) shut vp my thoughts,
   Alon. What, all so soone asleepe? I wish mine eyes

   Ant. Go sleepe, and heare vs


am very heauy
discretion so weakly: Will you laugh me asleepe, for I
   Gon. No I warrant you, I will not aduenture my

   Ant. Nay good my Lord, be not angry

  Seb. We would so, and then go a Bat-fowling

Enter Ariell playing solemne Musicke.

in it fiue weekes without changing.
lift the Moone out of her spheare, if she would continue
   Gon. You are Gentlemen of braue mettal: you would

  Seb. And it had not falne flat-long

   Ant. What a blow was there giuen?

to you: so you may continue, and laugh at nothing still
   Gon. Who, in this kind of merry fooling am nothing

   Ant. 'Twas you we laugh'd at

to laugh at nothing
such sensible and nimble Lungs, that they alwayes vse
to minister occasion to these Gentlemen, who are of
   Gon. I do well beleeue your Highnesse, and did it

  Alon. Pre-thee no more: thou dost talke nothing to me

   Gon. And do you marke me, Sir?

   Ant. Long liue Gonzalo

   Seb. 'Saue his Maiesty

T' Excell the Golden Age
  Gon. I would with such perfection gouerne Sir:

  Ant. None (man) all idle; Whores and knaues,

   Seb. No marrying 'mong his subiects?

To feed my innocent people
Of it owne kinde, all foyzon, all abundance
Would I not haue: but Nature should bring forth
Sword, Pike, Knife, Gun, or neede of any Engine
Without sweat or endeuour: Treason, fellony,
   Gon. All things in common Nature should produce

the beginning
   Ant. The latter end of his Common-wealth forgets

   Seb. Yet he would be King on't

No Soueraignty
And Women too, but innocent and pure:
No occupation, all men idle, all:
No vse of Mettall, Corne, or Wine, or Oyle:
Borne, bound of Land, Tilth, Vineyard none:
And vse of seruice, none: Contract, Succession,
Letters should not be knowne: Riches, pouerty,
Would I admit: No name of Magistrate:
Execute all things: For no kinde of Trafficke
   Gon. I'th' Commonwealth I would (by contraries)

  Seb. Scape being drunke, for want of Wine

   Gon. And were the King on't, what would I do?

   Seb. Or dockes, or Mallowes

   Ant. Hee'd sow't with Nettle-seed

   Gon. Had I plantation of this Isle my Lord

  Ant. Very foule

   Seb. Fowle weather?

When you are cloudy
   Gon. It is foule weather in vs all, good Sir,

   Ant. And most Chirurgeonly

   Seb. Very well

When you should bring the plaister
And time to speake it in: you rub the sore,
The truth you speake doth lacke some gentlenesse,
   Gon. My Lord Sebastian,

   Alon. So is the deer'st oth' losse

The faults your owne
Then we bring men to comfort them:
Mo widdowes in them of this businesse making,
I feare for euer: Millaine and Naples haue
Which end o'th' beame should bow: we haue lost your son,
Waigh'd betweene loathnesse, and obedience, at
By all of vs: and the faire soule her selfe
   Seb. You were kneel'd too, & importun'd otherwise

   Alon. Pre-thee peace

Who hath cause to wet the greefe on't
Where she at least, is banish'd from your eye,
But rather loose her to an Affrican,
That would not blesse our Europe with your daughter,
   Seb. Sir you may thank your selfe for this great losse,

   Alon. No, no, hee's gone

He came aliue to Land
As stooping to releeue him: I not doubt
To th' shore; that ore his waue-worne basis bowed
Himselfe with his good armes in lusty stroke
'Boue the contentious waues he kept, and oared
The surge most swolne that met him: his bold head
Whose enmity he flung aside: and brested
And ride vpon their backes; he trod the water
I saw him beate the surges vnder him,
  Fran. Sir he may liue,

Hath made his meale on thee?
Of Naples and of Millaine, what strange fish
I ne're againe shall see her: O thou mine heire
Who is so farre from Italy remoued,
My sonne is lost, and (in my rate) she too,
Married my daughter there: For comming thence
the stomacke of my sense: would I had neuer
   Alon. You cram these words into mine eares, against

   Gon. When I wore it at your daughters marriage

   Ant. That sort was well fish'd for

wore it? I meane in a sort
   Gon. Is not Sir my doublet as fresh as the first day I

   Ant. O Widdow Dido? I, Widdow Dido

   Seb. Bate (I beseech you) widdow Dido

   Ant. And the rarest that ere came there

of your daughter, who is now Queene
now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
   Gon. Sir, we were talking, that our garments seeme

   Ant. Why in good time

   Gon. I

forth more Islands
   Ant. And sowing the kernels of it in the Sea, bring

pocket, and giue it his sonne for an Apple
  Seb. I thinke hee will carry this Island home in his

   Ant. What impossible matter wil he make easy next?

   Seb. He hath rais'd the wall, and houses too

   Ant. His word is more then the miraculous Harpe

   Gon. I assure you Carthage

   Adri. Carthage?

   Gon. This Tunis Sir was Carthage

of that: She was of Carthage, not of Tunis
  Adri. Widdow Dido said you? You make me study

Good Lord, how you take it?
  Seb. What if he had said Widdower aeneas too?

in? Widdow Dido!
   Ant. Widow? A pox o'that: how came that Widdow

   Gon. Not since widdow Dido's time

to their Queene
   Adri. Tunis was neuer grac'd before with such a Paragon

our returne
   Seb. 'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in

of the kings faire daughter Claribel to the king of Tunis
when we put them on first in Affricke, at the marriage
   Gon. Me thinkes our garments are now as fresh as

  Seb. I, or very falsely pocket vp his report
it not say he lyes?
   Ant. If but one of his pockets could speake, would

water
glosses, being rather new dy'de then stain'd with salte
in the Sea, hold notwithstanding their freshnesse and
   Gon. That our Garments being (as they were) drencht

   Seb. As many voucht rarieties are

beyond credit
   Gon. But the rariety of it is, which is indeed almost

   Seb. No: he doth but mistake the truth totally

   Ant. He misses not much

   Seb. With an eye of greene in't

  Ant. The ground indeed is tawny

How greene?
   Gon. How lush and lusty the grasse lookes?

   Seb. Of that there's none, or little

   Ant. True, saue meanes to liue

   Gon. Heere is euery thing aduantageous to life

   Ant. Or, as 'twere perfum'd by a Fen

   Seb. As if it had Lungs, and rotten ones

   Adr. The ayre breathes vpon vs here most sweetly

   Seb. I, and a subtle, as he most learnedly deliuer'd

   Ant. Temperance was a delicate wench

temperance
   Adr. It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate

  Ant. He could not misse't

  Adr. Yet

   Seb. Yet

   Adr. Vninhabitable, and almost inaccessible

   Ant. So: you'r paid

   Seb. Ha, ha, ha

   Adr. Though this Island seeme to be desert

   Seb. A match

   Ant. A Laughter

   Seb. Done: The wager?

   Ant. The Cockrell

 Seb. The old Cocke

First begins to crow?
   Ant. Which, of he, or Adrian, for a good wager,

   Seb. He will be talking

   Gon. Well, I haue done: But yet

   Alon. I pre-thee spare

   Ant. Fie, what a spend-thrift is he of his tongue

   Gon. Therefore my Lord

should
   Seb. You haue taken it wiselier then I meant you

truer then you purpos'd
   Gon. Dolour comes to him indeed, you haue spoken

   Seb. A dollor

That's offer'd comes to th' entertainer
   Gon. When euery greefe is entertaind,

   Seb. One: Tell

   Gon. Sir

By and by it will strike
   Seb. Looke, hee's winding vp the watch of his wit,

   Ant. The Visitor will not giue him ore so

   Seb. He receiues comfort like cold porredge

   Alons. Prethee peace

Our sorrow, with our comfort
Can speake like vs: then wisely (good Sir) weigh
(I meane our preseruation) few in millions
Haue iust our Theame of woe: But for the miracle,
The Masters of some Merchant, and the Merchant
Is common, euery day, some Saylors wife,
Is much beyond our losse; our hint of woe
(So haue we all) of ioy; for our escape
  Gonz. Beseech you Sir, be merry; you haue cause,

others.
and
Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Anthonio, Gonzalo, Adrian, Francisco,

Actus Secundus. Scoena Prima.

Exeunt.

   Pros. Come follow: speake not for him.

   Ariell. To th' syllable

All points of my command
As mountaine windes; but then exactly do
   Pros. Thou shalt be as free

Which now came from him
Then he appeares by speech: this is vnwonted
My Fathers of a better nature (Sir)
   Mira. Be of comfort,

Harke what thou else shalt do mee
Thou hast done well, fine Ariell: follow me,
   Pros. It workes: Come on.

Haue I in such a prison
Let liberty make vse of: space enough
Behold this Mayd: all corners else o'th' Earth
Might I but through my prison once a day
To whom I am subdude, are but light to me,
The wracke of all my friends, nor this mans threats,
My Fathers losse, the weaknesse which I feele,
My spirits, as in a dreame, are all bound vp:
   Fer. So they are:

And haue no vigour in them
Thy Nerues are in their infancy againe.
   Pros. Come on, obey:

To see a goodlier man
Are then most humble: I haue no ambition
   Mira. My affections

And they to him are Angels
To th' most of men, this is a Caliban,
(Hauing seene but him and Caliban:) Foolish wench,
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
An aduocate for an Impostor? Hush:
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee: What,
   Pros. Silence: One word more

Ile be his surety
   Mira. Sir haue pity,

   Pros. Hence: hang not on my garments

   Mira. Beseech you Father

And make thy weapon drop
For I can heere disarme thee with this sticke,
Is so possest with guilt: Come, from thy ward,
Who mak'st a shew, but dar'st not strike: thy conscience
My foote my Tutor? Put thy sword vp Traitor,
   Pros. What I say,

Hee's gentle, and not fearfull
Make not too rash a triall of him, for
  Mira. O deere Father,

He drawes, and is charmed from mouing.

Mine enemy ha's more pow'r.
I will resist such entertainment, till
   Fer. No,

Wherein the Acorne cradled. Follow
The fresh-brooke Mussels, wither'd roots, and huskes
Sea water shalt thou drinke: thy food shall be
Ile manacle thy necke and feete together:
   Pros. Speake not you for him: hee's a Traitor: come,

   Pro. Follow me

Good things will striue to dwell with't
If the ill-spirit haue so fayre a house,
   Mir. Ther's nothing ill, can dwell in such a Temple,

   Fer. No, as I am a man

From me, the Lord on't
Vpon this Island, as a spy, to win it
The name thou ow'st not, and hast put thy selfe
That thou attend me: Thou do'st heere vsurpe
Make the prize light. One word more: I charge thee
I must vneasie make, least too light winning
They are both in eythers pow'rs: But this swift busines
   Pro. Soft sir, one word more.

The Queene of Naples
And your affection not gone forth, Ile make you
   Fer. O, if a Virgin,

To be enclin'd my way
That ere I sigh'd for: pitty moue my father
Is the third man that ere I saw: the first
   Mir. Why speakes my father so vngently? This

I feare you haue done your selfe some wrong: A word
Ile set thee free for this. A word good Sir,
They haue chang'd eyes: Delicate Ariel,
If now 'twere fit to do't: At the first sight
And his more brauer daughter, could controll thee
   Pro. The Duke of Millaine

And his braue sonne, being twaine
   Fer. Yes faith, & all his Lords, the Duke of Millaine

   Mir. Alacke, for mercy

The King my Father wrack't
Who, with mine eyes (neuer since at ebbe) beheld
And that he do's, I weepe: my selfe am Naples,
To heare thee speake of Naples: he do's heare me,
  Fer. A single thing, as I am now, that wonders

What wer't thou if the King of Naples heard thee?
   Pro. How? the best?

Were I but where 'tis spoken
I am the best of them that speake this speech,
   Fer. My Language? Heauens:

But certainly a Mayd
  Mir. No wonder Sir,

If you be Mayd, or no?
(Which I do last pronounce) is (O you wonder)
How I may beare me heere: my prime request
And that you will some good instruction giue
May know if you remaine vpon this Island,
On whom these ayres attend: Vouchsafe my pray'r
   Fer. Most sure the Goddesse

Within two dayes for this
As my soule prompts it: Spirit, fine spirit, Ile free thee
   Pro. It goes on I see

I euer saw so Noble
A thing diuine, for nothing naturall
   Mir. I might call him

And strayes about to finde 'em
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellowes,
With greefe (that's beauties canker) y might'st call him
Was in the wracke: and but hee's something stain'd
As we haue: such. This Gallant which thou seest
   Pro. No wench, it eats, and sleeps, & hath such senses

It carries a braue forme. But 'tis a spirit
Lord, how it lookes about: Beleeue me sir,
   Mira. What is't a Spirit?

And say what thou see'st yond
   Pro. The fringed Curtaines of thine eye aduance,

That the earth owes: I heare it now aboue me
This is no mortall busines, nor no sound
   Fer. The Ditty do's remember my drown'd father,

Harke now I heare them, ding-dong bell
Burthen: ding dong.

Sea-Nimphs hourly ring his knell.
Into something rich, & strange:
But doth suffer a Sea-change
Nothing of him that doth fade,
Those are pearles that were his eies,
Of his bones are Corrall made:
   Ariell Song. Full fadom fiue thy Father lies,

No, it begins againe
(Or it hath drawne me rather) but 'tis gone.
With it's sweet ayre: thence I haue follow'd it
Allaying both their fury, and my passion
This Musicke crept by me vpon the waters,
Weeping againe the King my Fathers wracke.
Some God o'th' Iland, sitting on a banke,
It sounds no more: and sure it waytes vpon
   Fer. Where shold this Musick be? I'th aire, or th' earth?

cry cockadidle-dowe
   Ar. Hark, hark, I heare, the straine of strutting Chanticlere

bowgh-wawgh
Harke, harke, bowgh wawgh: the watch-Dogges barke,

Burthen dispersedly.

the burthen.
Foote it featly heere, and there, and sweete Sprights beare
Curtsied when you haue, and kist the wilde waues whist:
take hands:
  Ariel Song. Come vnto these yellow sands, and then

Enter Ferdinand & Ariel, inuisible playing & singing.

Exit Cal.

   Pro. So slaue, hence.

And make a vassaile of him
It would controll my Dams god Setebos,
I must obey, his Art is of such pow'r,
   Cal. No, 'pray thee.

That beasts shall tremble at thy dyn
Fill all thy bones with Aches, make thee rore,
What I command, Ile racke thee with old Crampes,
If thou neglectst, or dost vnwillingly
To answer other businesse: shrug'st thou (Malice)
Fetch vs in Fewell, and be quicke thou'rt best
   Pros. Hag-seed, hence:

For learning me your language
Is, I know how to curse: the red-plague rid you
   Cal. You taught me Language, and my profit on't

Deseru'd more then a prison
Deseruedly confin'd into this Rocke, who hadst
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
(Tho thou didst learn) had that in't, which good natures
With words that made them knowne: But thy vild race
A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
Know thine owne meaning; but wouldst gabble, like
One thing or other: when thou didst not (Sauage)
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each houre
Being capable of all ill: I pittied thee,
Which any print of goodnesse wilt not take,
   Mira. Abhorred Slaue,

This Isle with Calibans
Thou didst preuent me, I had peopel'd else
   Cal. Oh ho, oh ho, would't had bene done:

The honor of my childe
In mine owne Cell, till thou didst seeke to violate
(Filth as thou art) with humane care, and lodg'd thee
Whom stripes may moue, not kindnes: I haue vs'd thee
   Pro. Thou most lying slaue,

The rest o'th' Island
In this hard Rocke, whiles you doe keepe from me
Which first was min owne King: and here you sty-me
For I am all the Subiects that you haue,
Of Sycorax: Toades, Beetles, Batts light on you:
Curs'd be I that did so: All the Charmes
The fresh Springs, Brine-pits; barren place and fertill,
And shew'd thee all the qualities o'th' Isle,
That burne by day, and night: and then I lou'd thee
To name the bigger Light, and how the lesse
Water with berries in't: and teach me how
Thou stroakst me, & made much of me: wouldst giue me
Which thou tak'st from me: when thou cam'st first
This Island's mine by Sycorax my mother,
   Cal. I must eat my dinner:

Then Bees that made 'em
As thicke as hony-combe, each pinch more stinging
All exercise on thee: thou shalt be pinch'd
Shall for that vast of night, that they may worke
Side-stitches, that shall pen thy breath vp, Vrchins
   Pro. For this be sure, to night thou shalt haue cramps,

And blister you all ore
Drop on you both: A Southwest blow on yee,
With Rauens feather from vnwholesome Fen
  Cal. As wicked dewe, as ere my mother brush'd

Enter Caliban.


Vpon thy wicked Dam; come forth.
  Pro. Thou poysonous slaue, got by y diuell himselfe

Enter.

   Ar. My Lord, it shall be done.

Hearke in thine eare
Fine apparision: my queint Ariel,

Enter Ariel like a water Nymph.

Come thou Tortoys, when?
   Pro. Come forth I say, there's other busines for thee:

   Cal. within. There's wood enough within

Thou Earth, thou: speake
That profit vs: What hoa: slaue: Caliban:
Fetch in our wood, and serues in Offices
We cannot misse him: he do's make our fire,
   Pro. But as 'tis

   Mir. 'Tis a villaine Sir, I doe not loue to looke on

Yeelds vs kinde answere
Wee'll visit Caliban, my slaue, who neuer
   Pro. Shake it off: Come on,

Heauinesse in me
   Mir. The strangenes of your story, put

Awake
  Pro. Awake, deere hart awake, thou hast slept well,

Enter.

With diligence.
And hither come in't: goe: hence
To euery eye-ball else: goe take this shape
Be subiect to no sight but thine, and mine: inuisible
  Pro. Goe make thy selfe like a Nymph o'th' Sea,

What shall I doe? say what? what shall I doe?
   Ar. That's my noble Master:

I will discharge thee
   Pro. Doe so: and after two daies

And doe my spryting, gently
I will be correspondent to command
   Ar. Pardon, Master,

Thou hast howl'd away twelue winters
And peg-thee in his knotty entrailes, till
   Pro. If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an Oake

   Ar. I thanke thee Master

The Pyne, and let thee out
When I arriu'd, and heard thee, that made gape
Could not againe vndoe: it was mine Art,
To lay vpon the damn'd, which Sycorax
Of euer-angry Beares; it was a torment
Did make wolues howle, and penetrate the breasts
What torment I did finde thee in; thy grones
Whom now I keepe in seruice, thou best know'st
   Pro. Dull thing, I say so: he, that Caliban

   Ar. Yes: Caliban her sonne

A humane shape
A frekelld whelpe, hag-borne) not honour'd with
(Saue for the Son, that he did littour heere,
As fast as Mill-wheeles strike: Then was this Island
And left thee there: where thou didst vent thy groanes
A dozen yeeres: within which space she di'd,
Imprison'd, thou didst painefully remaine
Into a clouen Pyne, within which rift
And in her most vnmittigable rage,
By helpe of her more potent Ministers,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee
To act her earthy, and abhord commands,
And for thou wast a Spirit too delicate
As thou reportst thy selfe, was then her seruant,
And here was left by th' Saylors; thou my slaue,
   Pro. This blew ey'd hag, was hither brought with child,

   Ar. I, Sir

They wold not take her life: Is not this true?
Thou know'st was banish'd: for one thing she did
To enter humane hearing, from Argier
For mischiefes manifold, and sorceries terrible
Which thou forgetst. This damn'd Witch Sycorax
Once in a moneth recount what thou hast bin,
   Pro. Oh, was she so: I must

   Ar. Sir, in Argier

   Pro. Thou hast: where was she born? speak: tell me:

   Ar. No Sir

Was growne into a hoope? hast thou forgot her?
The fowle Witch Sycorax, who with Age and Enuy
   Pro. Thou liest, malignant Thing: hast thou forgot

   Ar. I doe not Sir

When it is bak'd with frost
To doe me businesse in the veines o'th' earth
To run vpon the sharpe winde of the North,
Of the salt deepe;
   Pro. Thou do'st: & thinkst it much to tread y Ooze

   Ar. No

From what a torment I did free thee?
   Pro. Do'st thou forget

To bate me a full yeere
Without or grudge, or grumblings; thou did promise
Told thee no lyes, made thee no mistakings, serv'd
Remember I haue done thee worthy seruice,
  Ar. I prethee,

   Pro. Before the time be out? no more:

   Ar. My Libertie

What is't thou canst demand?
    Pro. How now? moodie?

Which is not yet perform'd me
Let me remember thee what thou hast promis'd,
    Ar. Is there more toyle? Since y dost giue me pains,

Must by vs both be spent most preciously
    Pro. At least two Glasses: the time 'twixt six & now

    Ar. Past the mid season

What is the time o'th' day?
Exactly is perform'd; but there's more worke:
    Pro. Ariel, thy charge

And his great person perish
Supposing that they saw the Kings ship wrackt,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
And are vpon the Mediterranian Flote
(Which I dispers'd) they all haue met againe,
I haue left asleep: and for the rest o'th' Fleet
Who, with a Charme ioynd to their suffred labour
The Marriners all vnder hatches stowed,
From the still-vext Bermoothes, there she's hid;
Thou calldst me vp at midnight to fetch dewe
Is the Kings shippe, in the deepe Nooke, where once
  Ar. Safely in harbour

And all the rest o'th' Fleete?
The Marriners, say how thou hast disposd,
   Pro. Of the Kings ship,

His armes in this sad knot
In an odde Angle of the Isle, and sitting
Whom I left cooling of the Ayre with sighes,
The Kings sonne haue I landed by himselfe,
In troops I haue dispersd them 'bout the Isle:
But fresher then before: and as thou badst me,
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
   Ar. Not a haire perishd:

   Pro. But are they (Ariell) safe?

   Ar. Close by, my Master

But was not this nye shore?
   Pro. Why that's my spirit:

And all the Diuels are heere
Was the first man that leapt; cride hell is empty,
With haire vp-staring (then like reeds, not haire)
Then all a fire with me the Kings sonne Ferdinand
Plung'd in the foaming bryne, and quit the vessell;
Some tricks of desperation; all but Mariners
But felt a Feauer of the madde, and plaid
  Ar. Not a soule

Would not infect his reason?
Who was so firme, so constant, that this coyle
   Pro. My braue Spirit,

Yea, his dread Trident shake
Seeme to besiege, and make his bold waues tremble,
Of sulphurous roaring, the most mighty Neptune
And sight out-running were not; the fire, and cracks
O'th dreadfull Thunder-claps more momentarie
Then meete, and ioyne. Ioues Lightning, the precursers
The Yards and Bore-spritt, would I flame distinctly,
And burne in many places; on the Top-mast,
I flam'd amazement, sometime I'ld diuide
Now in the Waste, the Decke, in euery Cabyn,
I boorded the Kings ship: now on the Beake,
   Ar. To euery Article.

Performd to point, the Tempest that I bad thee
   Pro. Hast thou, Spirit,

Ariel, and all his Qualitie
On the curld clowds: to thy strong bidding, taske
To swim, to diue into the fire: to ride
To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
  Ari. All haile, great Master, graue Sir, haile: I come

Enter Ariel.

Approach my Ariel. Come.
Come away, Seruant, come; I am ready now,
And giue it way: I know thou canst not chuse:
Thou art inclinde to sleepe: 'tis a good dulnesse,
Will euer after droope: Heare cease more questions,
If now I court not, but omit; my fortunes
A most auspitious starre, whose influence
I finde my Zenith doth depend vpon
Brought to this shore: And by my prescience
(Now my deere Lady) hath mine enemies
By accident most strange, bountifull Fortune
   Pro. Know thus far forth,

For raysing this Sea-storme?
For still 'tis beating in my minde; your reason
   Mir. Heuens thank you for't. And now I pray you Sir,

For vainer howres; and Tutors, not so carefull
Then other Princesse can, that haue more time
Haue I, thy Schoolemaster, made thee more profit
Heere in this Iland we arriu'd, and heere
Sit still, and heare the last of our sea-sorrow:
   Pro. Now I arise,

But euer see that man
   Mir. Would I might

I prize aboue my Dukedome
From mine owne Library, with volumes, that
Knowing I lou'd my bookes, he furnishd me
Which since haue steeded much, so of his gentlenesse
Rich garments, linnens, stuffs, and necessaries
Master of this designe) did giue vs, with
Out of his Charity, (who being then appointed
A noble Neopolitan Gonzalo
Some food, we had, and some fresh water, that
   Pro. By prouidence diuine,

   Mir. How came we a shore?

Against what should ensue
An vndergoing stomacke, to beare vp
Vnder my burthen groan'd, which rais'd in me
When I haue deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
Infused with a fortitude from heauen,
Thou was't that did preserue me; Thou didst smile,
   Pro. O, a Cherubin

Was I then to you?
   Mir. Alack, what trouble

Did vs but louing wrong
To th' windes, whose pitty sighing backe againe
To cry to th' Sea, that roard to vs; to sigh
Instinctiuely haue quit it: There they hoyst vs
Nor tackle, sayle, nor mast, the very rats
A rotten carkasse of a Butt, not rigg'd,
Bore vs some Leagues to Sea, where they prepared
In few, they hurried vs aboord a Barke,
With colours fairer, painted their foule ends.
A marke so bloudy on the businesse; but
So deare the loue my people bore me: nor set
My Tale prouokes that question: Deare, they durst not,
  Pro. Well demanded, wench:

That howre destroy vs?
   Mir. Wherefore did they not

Were most impertinent
Which now's vpon's: without the which, this Story
And then I'le bring thee to the present businesse
   Pro. Heare a little further,

That wrings mine eyes too't
Will cry it ore againe: it is a hint
I not remembring how I cride out then
   Mir. Alack, for pitty:

Me, and thy crying selfe
The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence
The gates of Millaine, and ith' dead of darkenesse
Fated to th' purpose, did Anthonio open
A treacherous Armie leuied, one mid-night
With all the Honors, on my brother: Whereon
Out of the Dukedome, and confer faire Millaine
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Of homage, and I know not how much Tribute,
Which was, That he in lieu o'th' premises,
To me inueterate, hearkens my Brothers suit,
This King of Naples being an Enemy
   Pro. Now the Condition.

Good wombes haue borne bad sonnes
To thinke but Noblie of my Grand-mother,
   Mira. I should sinne

If this might be a brother
  Pros. Marke his condition, and th' euent, then tell me

   Mira. Oh the heauens:

To most ignoble stooping
The Dukedom yet vnbow'd (alas poore Millaine)
Subiect his Coronet, to his Crowne and bend
To giue him Annuall tribute, doe him homage
(so drie he was for Sway) with King of Naples
He thinks me now incapable. Confederates
Was Dukedome large enough: of temporall roalties
Absolute Millaine, Me (poore man) my Librarie
And him he plaid it for, he needes will be
   Pros. To haue no Schreene between this part he plaid,

  Mira. Your tale, Sir, would cure deafenesse

Do'st thou heare ?
With all prerogatiue: hence his Ambition growing:
And executing th' outward face of Roialtie
He was indeed the Duke, out o'th' Substitution
To credite his owne lie, he did beleeue
Made such a synner of his memorie
Who hauing into truth, by telling of it,
But what my power might els exact. Like one
Not onely with what my reuenew yeelded,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus Lorded,
As my trust was, which had indeede no limit,
A falsehood in it's contrarie, as great
Like a good parent, did beget of him
Awak'd an euill nature, and my trust
Ore-priz'd all popular rate: in my false brother
with that, which but by being so retir'd
To closenes, and the bettering of my mind
I thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
Pros. I pray thee marke me:

  Mira. O good Sir, I doe

And suckt my verdure out on't: Thou attend'st not?
The Iuy which had hid my princely Trunck,
To what tune pleas'd his eare, that now he was
Of Officer, and office, set all hearts i'th state
Or els new form'd 'em; hauing both the key,
The creatures that were mine, I say, or chang'd 'em,
To trash for ouer-topping; new created
how to deny them: who t' aduance, and who
   Pros. Being once perfected how to graunt suites,

  Mira. Sir, most heedefully

(Do'st thou attend me?)
And rapt in secret studies, thy false vncle
And to my State grew stranger, being transported
The Gouernment I cast vpon my brother,
Without a paralell; those being all my studie,
In dignity; and for the liberall Artes,
And Prospero, the prime Duke, being so reputed
Through all the signories it was the first,
The mannage of my state, as at that time
Of all the world I lou'd, and to him put
Be so perfidious: he, whom next thy selfe
I pray thee marke me, that a brother should
  Pros. My brother and thy vncle, call'd Anthonio:

Which is from my remembrance, please you, farther;
To thinke oth' teene that I haue turn'd you to,
   Mira. O my heart bleedes

But blessedly holpe hither
By fowle-play (as thou saist) were we heau'd thence,
  Pros. Both, both my Girle.

Or blessed was't we did?
What fowle play had we, that we came from thence?
   Mira. O the heauens,

And Princesse; no worse Issued
Was Duke of Millaine, and his onely heire,
She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
  Pros. Thy Mother was a peece of vertue, and

  Mira. Sir, are not you my Father?

A Prince of power:
Thy father was the Duke of Millaine and
   Pros. Twelue yere since (Miranda) twelue yere since,

   Mira. But that I doe not

How thou cam'st here thou maist
Yf thou remembrest ought ere thou cam'st here,
In the dark-backward and Abisme of Time?
That this liues in thy minde? What seest thou els
  Pros. Thou hadst; and more Miranda: But how is it

Fowre, or fiue women once, that tended me?
That my remembrance warrants: Had I not
And rather like a dreame, then an assurance
   Mira. 'Tis farre off:

Hath kept with thy remembrance
Of any thing the Image, tell me, that
   Pros. By what? by any other house, or person?

   Mira. Certainely Sir, I can

Out three yeeres old
I doe not thinke thou canst, for then thou was't not
A time before we came vnto this Cell?
Obey, and be attentiue. Canst thou remember
The very minute byds thee ope thine eare,
   Pros. The howr's now come

Concluding, stay: not yet
And left me to a bootelesse Inquisition,
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopt
   Mira. You haue often

For thou must now know farther
Which thou heardst cry, which thou saw'st sinke: Sit downe,
Betid to any creature in the vessell
No not so much perdition as an hayre
So safely ordered, that there is no soule
I haue with such prouision in mine Art
The very vertue of compassion in thee:
The direfull spectacle of the wracke which touch'd
Lye there my Art: wipe thou thine eyes, haue comfort,
And plucke my Magick garment from me: So,
I should informe thee farther: Lend thy hand
   Pros. 'Tis time

Did neuer medle with my thoughts
   Mira. More to know

And thy no greater Father
Then Prospero, Master of a full poore cell,
Of whence I am: nor that I am more better
Art ignorant of what thou art. naught knowing
(Of thee my deere one; thee my daughter) who
I haue done nothing, but in care of thee
   Pros. No harme:

   Mira. O woe, the day

there's no harme done
No more amazement: Tell your pitteous heart
   Pros. Be collected,

The fraughting Soules within her
It should the good Ship so haue swallow'd, and
Haue suncke the Sea within the Earth, or ere
Had I byn any God of power, I would
Against my very heart: poore soules, they perish'd.
Dash'd all to peeces: O the cry did knocke
(Who had no doubt some noble creature in her)
With those that I saw suffer: A braue vessell
Dashes the fire out. Oh! I haue suffered
But that the Sea, mounting to th' welkins cheeke,
The skye it seemes would powre down stinking pitch,
Put the wild waters in this Rore; alay them:
  Mira. If by your Art (my deerest father) you haue

Enter Prospero and Miranda.


Scena Secunda.


Enter.

faine dye a dry death.
firrs, any thing; the wills aboue be done, but I would
for an Acre of barren ground: Long heath, Browne
  Gonz. Now would I giue a thousand furlongs of Sea,

Enter.

  Seb. Let's take leaue of him.

   Anth. Let's all sinke with' King

Farewell brother: we split, we split, we split
We split, we split, Farewell my wife, and children,
Mercy on vs.

A confused noyse within.

And gape at widst to glut him.
Though euery drop of water sweare against it,
   Gonz. Hee'l be hang'd yet,

the washing of ten Tides
This wide-chopt-rascall, would thou mightst lye drowning
   An. We are meerly cheated of our liues by drunkards,

   Sebas. I'am out of patience

for our case is as theirs
  Gonz. The King, and Prince, at prayers, let's assist them,

  Botes. What must our mouths be cold?

  Mari. All lost, to prayers, to prayers, all lost.

Enter Mariners wet.

to Sea againe, lay her off.
  Botes. Lay her a hold, a hold, set her two courses off

an vnstanched wench.
Ship were no stronger then a Nutt-shell, and as leaky as
  Gonz. I'le warrant him for drowning, though the

we are lesse afraid to be drownde, then thou art.
  Anth. Hang cur, hang, you whoreson insolent Noyse-maker,
  Botes. Worke you then.

incharitable Dog.
  Sebas. A poxe o'your throat, you bawling, blasphemous

giue ore and drowne, haue you a minde to sinke?
or our office: yet againe? What do you heere? Shal we
vpon this howling: they are lowder then the weather,

A cry within. Enter Sebastian, Anthonio & Gonzalo.

bring her to Try with Maine-course. A plague -
  Botes. Downe with the top-Mast: yare, lower, lower,

Enter Boteswaine

Enter.

hang'd, our case is miserable.
owne doth little aduantage: If he be not borne to bee
make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our
is perfect Gallowes: stand fast good Fate to his hanging,
he hath no drowning marke vpon him, his complexion
  Gon. I haue great comfort from this fellow: methinks

Enter.

way I say.
houre, if it so hap. Cheerely good hearts: out of our
selfe readie in your Cabine for the mischance of the
giue thankes you haue liu'd so long, and make your
hand a rope more, vse your authoritie: If you cannot,
and worke the peace of the present, wee will not
a Counsellor, if you can command these Elements to silence,
  Botes. None that I more loue then my selfe. You are

  Gon. Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboord.

  Botes. When the Sea is: hence, what cares these roarers for the name of King? to Cabine; silence: trouble vs not.

  Gonz: Nay, good be patient.

  Botes: Do you not heare him? you marre our labour, Keepe your Cabines: you do assist the storme.

  Anth: Where is the Master, Boson?

  Botes: I pray now keepe below.

Play the men.
  Alon: Good Boteswaine have care: where's the Master?

others.
Enter Alonso, Sebastian, Anthonio, Ferdinando, Gonzalo, and

whistle: Blow till thou burst thy winde, if roome enough.
yare, yare: Take in the toppe-sale: Tend to th' Masters
  Botes: Heigh my hearts, cheerely, cheerely my harts:

Enter Mariners.

Enter.

bestirre, bestirre.
too't, yarely, or we run our selves a ground,
  Master: Good: Speake to th' Mariners: fall

  Botes: Heere Master: What cheere?

  Master: Bote-swaine

and a Boteswaine.
Ship-master,
A tempestuous noise of Thunder and Lightning heard: Enter a

Actus primus, Scena prima.

The Tempest

David Reed

and davidr@inconnect.com.  I hope that you enjoy this.
etext possible.  My email address for right now are haradda@aol.com
free to email me those errors.  I wish to make this the best
errors, or if you disagree with my spelling choices please feel
If you find any scanning errors, out and out typos, punctuation

First Folio editions' best pages.
The text I have used was a composite of more than 30 different
incorporated into the printed copies.  This is just the way it is.
continuing the printing run.  The proof run wasn't thrown away but
then proofing the printed copy and correcting the type and then
habit of setting the type and running off a number of copies and
this and other first folio editions.  This is due to the printer's
be differences (other than what I have mentioned above) between
differences between various copies of the first folio.  So there may
Another thing that you should be aware of is that there are textual

purer Shakespeare.
you can delete everything within the brackets if you want a
brackets [] is what I have added.  So if you don't like that
abbreviations as I have come across them.  Everything within
spellings according to this template), typo's and expanded
Geneva Bible and Shakespeare's First Folio and have unified
together a spelling dictionary devised from the spellings of the
printed text.  I have corrected some spelling mistakes (I have put
punctuation, capitalization as close as possible to the
conjoined ae have been changed to ae.  I have left the spelling,
The elongated S's have been changed to small s's and the

come in ASCII to the printed text.
a copy of Shakespeare's first folio and it is as close as I can
Scanner's Notes: What this is and isn't.  This was taken from


***


Executive Director
Project Gutenberg
Michael S. Hart

Part of Henry the Sixt.
here is the Project Gutenberg Etext of Shakespeare's The first 
So. . .with this caveat. . .we have NOT changed the canon errors,

that are "not" errors. . . .
made by our volunteer who prepared this file:  you may see errors
So, please take this into account when reading the comments below

for signing his name with several different spellings.
variety of errors we credit him for, even though he was in/famous
that Shakespeare most likely did not write in nearly as many of a
. . .in great detail. . .and determined from the various changes,
purpose.  To the best of my knowledge he read ALL those available
in England for several months in a glass room constructed for the
assortment of these made available to him by Cambridge University
very high place in the "canon" of Shakespeare.  My father read an
extreme attachment to these errors, and many have accorded them a
have mentioned in other times and places, many "scholars" have an
You will find a lot of these kinds of "errors" in this text, as I

more on a wider selection of characters than they had to.
as print was still quite expensive, and they didn't want to spend
place of some "w"'s, etc.  This was a common practice of the day,
time when they were out of "v"'s. . .possibly having used "vv" in
The answer is that they MAY have packed "liue" into a cliche at a

Shakespeare did not actually write the play in this manner. . . .
above. . .and you may wonder why they did it this way, presuming
that look very odd. . .such as the exchanges of u for v, v for u,
to unpack the cliches, and thus you will see some substitutions
original meaning of the term cliche. . .and thus, being unwilling
or letters they had often packed into a "cliche". . .this is the
As I understand it, the printers often ran out of certain words

***

   Bar. Long liue the King

your selfe
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
  Barnardo. Who's there?

are presented herein:
been corrected, here are the first few lines of Hamlet, as they
the spelling errors introduced by the printers of the time have
In addition to the notes below, and so you will *NOT* think all

Executive Director's Notes:




Henry the Sixt
Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's The first Part of 





*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*

Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?

     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     University" within the 60 days following each
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the

     "Small Print!" statement.
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this

          or other equivalent proprietary form).
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at

          OR
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at

          indicate hypertext links; OR
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          does *not* contain characters other than those
     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and

     *EITHER*:
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this

or:
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"

or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
INDEMNITY

may have other legal rights.
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or

PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER

receive it electronically.
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of

POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES

codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable

under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
distribute it in the United States without permission and
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS

medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT

you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***


(Three Pages)

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

***

GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
dir [to see files]
cd etext90 through etext99
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
password: your@login
login: anonymous
ftp sunsite.unc.edu

Example FTP session:

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

at http://promo.net/pg).
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any

for a more complete list of our various sites.
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
author and by title, and includes information about how
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser

******

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:

Champaign, IL 61825
P. O. Box  2782
Project Gutenberg

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Mellon University).
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are


We need your donations more than ever!

don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third

which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext

total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The

Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)


new copy has at least one byte more or less.
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till

of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance


of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,


VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 0ws4110a.txt
Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 0ws4111.txt

*****This file should be named 0ws4110.txt or 0ws4110.zip******

***************************The Tempest**************************
***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***


July, 2000  [Etext #2235]

by William Shakespeare

The Tempest


further information is included below.  We need your donations.
Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**


electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
Please take a look at the important information in this header.

the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!
Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check


This is our 3rd edition of most of these plays.  See the index.

***************************The Tempest**************************
***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
